Assignment: Introduction to Python
Instructions:
Answer the following questions based on your understanding of Python programming. Provide detailed explanations and examples where appropriate.

 Questions:

1. Python Basics:
   - What is Python, and what are some of its key features that make it popular among developers? Provide examples of use cases where Python is particularly effective.

Python is a high-level, interpreted programming language known for its readability and simplicity. Its syntax emphasizes readability and allows developers to express concepts in fewer lines of code compared to languages like C++ or Java. Python supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming.

Key Features:

1. Readability: Python's syntax is designed to be readable and straightforward.
2. Ease of Learning: Python is easy to learn for beginners due to its simplicity.
3. Versatility: It can be used for web development, data analysis, artificial intelligence, scientific computing, and more.
4. Rich Ecosystem: Extensive libraries and frameworks, such as NumPy, pandas, Django, and Flask.
5. Cross-Platform: Python runs on various operating systems, including Windows, macOS, and Linux.
Use Cases:

Web Development: Using frameworks like Django or Flask.
Data Analysis: With libraries like pandas and NumPy.
Artificial Intelligence: Through libraries like TensorFlow or PyTorch.
Automation: For scripting and automating repetitive tasks.
Scientific Computing: Using libraries like SciPy and Jupyter Notebooks.

2. Installing Python:
   - Describe the steps to install Python on your operating system (Windows, macOS, or Linux). Include how to verify the installation and set up a virtual environment.

   Steps for Installation:

Download Python:

Go to the official https://www.python.org/downloads/
Download the installer suitable for your operating system (Windows, macOS, or Linux).
Install Python:

Windows: Run the installer and check the box to add Python to your PATH. Follow the installation wizard.
macOS: Open the downloaded .pkg file and follow the instructions.
Linux: Use your package manager, e.g., sudo apt-get install python3 for Ubuntu.
Verify Installation:

Open a terminal or command prompt and type python --version or python3 --version to check the installed version.s.
et Up Virtual Environment:

Install venv if it’s not installed: pip install virtualenv.
Create a virtual environment: python -m venv myenv.
Activate the virtual environment:
Windows: myenv\Scripts\activate
macOS/Linux: source myenv/bin/activate
3. Python Syntax and Semantics:
   - Write a simple Python program that prints "Hello, World!" to the console. Explain the basic syntax elements used in the program.

   print("Hello,world!")
   Explanation:

print(): A built-in function that outputs text to the console.
"Hello, World!": A string literal that is passed as an argument to print().

4. Data Types and Variables:
   - List and describe the basic data types in Python. Write a short script that demonstrates how to create and use variables of different data types.

Basic Data Types:

Integer: Whole numbers, e.g., 5.
Float: Decimal numbers, e.g., 3.14.
String: Sequence of characters, e.g., "Hello".
Boolean: Represents True or False
 Integer

age = 25

 Float
height = 5.9

 String
name = "Alice"

 Boolean
is_student = True

print("Age:", age)
print("Height:", height)
print("Name:", name)
print("Is student:", is_student)

5. Control Structures:

   - Explain the use of conditional statements and loops in Python. Provide examples of an `if-else` statement and a `for` loop.
   conditional statement
age = 18

if age >= 18:
    print("You are an adult.")
else:
    print("You are a minor.")

for loop
for i in range(5):
    print(i)

6. Functions in Python:
   - What are functions in Python, and why are they useful? Write a Python function that takes two arguments and returns their sum. Include an example of how to call this function.

   def add_numbers(a, b):
    return a + b

result = add_numbers(5, 7)
print("The sum is:", result)


7. Lists and Dictionaries:
   - Describe the differences between lists and dictionaries in Python. Write a script that creates a list of numbers and a dictionary with some key-value pairs, then demonstrates basic operations on both.

   Lists and Dictionaries
Lists:

Ordered collection of items.
Example: numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

Dictionaries:

Unordered collection of key-value pairs.
Example: person = {"name": "Alice", "age": 30}

8. Exception Handling:
   - What is exception handling in Python? Provide an example of how to use `try`, `except`, and `finally` blocks to handle errors in a Python script.

Exception handling allows you to manage errors and unexpected situations gracefully.

try:
    x = 10 / 0
except ZeroDivisionError:


    print("Cannot divide by zero.")
finally:
    print("Execution completed.")

9. Modules and Packages:
   - Explain the concepts of modules and packages in Python. How can you import and use a module in your script? Provide an example using the `math` module.
   Concepts:

Modules: Python files (.py) containing functions, classes, or variables.
Packages: Collections of modules in directories.

import math

print("Square root of 16:", math.sqrt(16))


10. File I/O:
    - How do you read from and write to files in Python? Write a script that reads the content of a file and prints it to the console, and another script that writes a list of strings to a file.

    Reading from a File:
    with open('example.txt', 'r') as file:
    content = file.read()
    print(content)

Writing to a File:
with open('example.txt', 'w') as file:
    lines = ["Hello", "World", "Python is awesome!"]
    file.write("\n".join(lines))




